"Soil\n\tApples grow best on a well-drained, loam soils having a depth of 45 cm and a pH range of pH 5.5-6.5. The soil should be free from hard substrata and water-logged conditions. Soils with heavy clay or compact subsoil are to be avoided.\n\nPlanting\n\tThe planting distance varies according to variety and the fertility level of the soil. The main consideration in planting trees is planting of sufficient pollinators to ensure effective pollination. Usually one pollinator tree is needed for two to three large trees planted at 10 m distance or one row pollinator for two rows of main cultivar. For high density planting the pollinator tree is planted after every sixth tree in a row.\n\tThe most widely used planting system is the square system. In this system, the pollinators are planted after every sixth or ninth tree. The other popular system of planting is the rectangular system. In hilly areas the apple orchards are established by planting the trees on the contours so as to prevent soil erosion and reduce run off.\n\tThe average number of plants in an area of one ha. can range between 200 to 1250. Four different categories of planting density are followed viz. low (less than 250 plants/ha.), moderate (250-500 plants/ha.), high (500-1250 plants/ha.) and ultra high density (more than 1250 plants /ha.). The combination of rootstock and scion variety determines the plant spacing and planting density/unit area.\n\nTime and method of planting\n\tPlanting is usually done in the month of January and February.\n\tPits measuring 60 cm are dug two weeks before planting. The pits are filled with good loamy soil and organic matter. Planting is done in the centre of the pit by scooping the soil and placing the soil ball keeping the roots intact. Loose soil is filled up in the remaining area and lightly pressed to remove air gaps. The seedlings are staked and watered immediately.\n\nIrrigation\n\tApple trees are particularly sensitive to low soil moisture. Water stress during the growing season reduces number and size of fruits, and increases June drop. Success of apple largely depends on uniform distribution of rain during the year in case of dry spells during the critical periods supplementary irrigation should be provided. Water stress conditions results in poor fruit set, heavy fruit drop, low production and poor quality. The most critical periods of water requirement are April- August and peak water requirement is after fruit set. Normally the orchards are irrigated immediately after manuring in the month of December-January. During the summer periods, the crop is irrigated at an interval of 7-10 days. After the fruit setting stage the crop is irrigated at weekly intervals. Application of water during the fortnight preceding harvest markedly improves the fruit colour. Thereafter till the onset of dormancy, irrigation is given at an interval of 3-4 weeks.\n\nManuring & Fertilization\n\tFarmyard manure @ 10 kg./ year age of tree is applied along with other fertilizers. The fertilizer dose depends upon the fertility of soil and amount of organic manure applied to the crop. Generally, application of 350 g N, 175 g P2O5 and 350 g K2O per plant per year in split doses is recommended for fully-grown bearing trees. On some trees deficiency of zinc, boron, manganese and calcium may be observed which is corrected with the application of appropriate chemicals through foliage spray.\n\nHarvesting\n\tNormally the apples are ready for harvest from September-October except in the Nilgiris where the season is from April to July. The fruits mature within 130-150 days after the full bloom stage depending upon the variety grown. The ripening of fruits is associated with the change in colour, texture, quality and the development of the characteristic flavour. The fruits at the time of harvest should be uniform, firm and crisp. The colour of the skin at maturity ranges from yellow-red depending on the variety. However, the optimum time of harvest depends on fruit quality and intended period of storage. Due to the introduction of dwarf rootstock hand picking is recommended as it reduces bruising due to fruit fall during mechanical harvesting."